Feature/m0224 fl 124 add event queue pack (#667)
MicroEJ/docs: VEEPortingGuide/eventQueue.rst

.. _pack_event:

===========
Event Queue
===========

Principle
=========

The Event Queue module provides an asynchronous communication interface between the native world and the Java world based on events.

Functional Description
======================

Overview
--------

> The Event Queue Foundation Library allows users to send events from the native world to the Java world. It is composed of a Java API that provides mechanisms to register specific event notifications and a native API that allows someone to send events in the queue.

Author: Done

.. figure:: images/event-queue-overview.png
   :alt: Event Queue Overview
   :align: center
   :scale: 65%

   Event Queue Overview

> A FIFO mechanism is implemented on the native side and is system specific. The user can offer events to this FIFO by using the native or the Java API. 

Author: Done

> Event notifications are handled using event listeners (Observer design pattern). The application code has to register event listeners to the event handler (provided by the Foundation Library) to be notified when new events are coming.

Author: Done

> Then the queue retrieves new events pushed in the FIFO and notifies the application and the event listeners. 

Author: Done

Architecture
------------

The Event Queue Foundation Library uses a dedicated Java thread to forward and process events. Application event listener's calls are done in the context of the Event Queue thread. 

.. figure:: images/event-queue-architecture.png
   :alt: Event Queue Architecture
   :align: center
   :scale: 65%

   Event Queue Architecture

Events reading operations are done using the SNI mechanism. Event Queue Java thread is suspended if an event read is called and the events FIFO is empty. Event Queue Java thread resume is done by the native part when a new event is sent if the events FIFO was previously empty.

.. figure:: images/event-queue-synchronization.png
   :alt: Event Queue Task Synchronization
   :align: center
   :scale: 65%

   Event Queue Task Synchronization

Event format
------------

> Only integers (4 bytes) are sent through the FIFO, so there are two kinds of events that can be sent over the Event Queue:

Author: Done

> Only integers (4 bytes) are sent through the FIFO, so there are two kinds of events that can be sent over the Event Queue:

Author: Done

- Non-extended event: an event that fits on 4 bytes.

> - Extended event: an event that does not fit on 4 bytes. 

Author: Done

.. code-block:: java

    +--------------+----------+---------------------------------------------------+
    | Extended (1) | Type (7) | Data (if Extended=0), Length (if Extended=1) (24) |
    +--------------+----------+---------------------------------------------------+
    ...
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+
    |                  Extended Data for extended events (32)                     | (x integers)
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Format explanation:

> - `Extended`: extended event flag, give the kind of event sent. (1 bit) 
> - `Type`: event type that allows to find the corresponding event listener. (7 bits)
> - `Length`: length of the data in bytes, only if it is an extended event. (24 bits)
> - `Data`: data for non-extended events. (24 bits)
> - `Extended data`: data for extended events. (Length bytes)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Extended` (1 bit): event's kind flag (0 for non-extended event, 1 for extended event).
- `Type` (7 bits): event's type, which allows to find the corresponding event listener.
- `Length` (24 bits): length of the data in bytes (for extended events only).
- `Data` (24 bits): non-extended event's data (for non-extended events only).
- `Extended data` (``Length`` bytes): extended event's data (for extended events only).
```

Author: Done

Event listener
--------------

The user can register some listeners to the Event Queue. 
Each listener is registered with an event type.

> A listener can be registered for several event types, but each event type can only have one listener. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same listener can be registered for several event types, but each event type can only have one listener. 
```

Author: Done

When the queue receives an event from the FIFO, it will get the event type and check if it is an extended event. 
Then it will check if a listener is registered for this event type.
If so, it will call its handle method depending on the extended event flag. 

> It will call the default listener if no listener corresponds to the event type. 

Author: I had the followiing lines: 

Before registering your listener, you must get a valid unique type using the ``getNewType()`` method from the ``EventQueue`` class.
Then you can register your listener using the ``registerListener(EventListener listener, int type)`` method from the ``EventQueue`` class.

> It will call the default listener if no listener corresponds to the event type. 

Reviewer 2: That does not explain that you should pass the type to your native stack for it to be able to send events of that type.

> You can create your Event listener by implementing the EventListener interface. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can create your Event listener by implementing the ``EventListener`` interface. 
```

Author: Done

It contains two methods that are used to handle non-extended and extended events. 

> Before registering your listener, you must get a valid type using the ``getNewType()`` method from EventQueue API. 

Author: Done

> Then you can register your listener using the ``registerListener(EventListener listener, int type)`` method from the EventQueue API. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then you can register your listener using the ``registerListener(EventListener listener, int type)`` method from the ``EventQueue`` class. 
```

Author: Done

> To set the defaultListener, you must use ``setDefaultListener(EventListener listener)`` from the EventQueue API. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To set the defaultListener, you must use ``setDefaultListener(EventListener listener)`` from the ``EventQueue`` class. 
```

Author: Done

> 

Author: Done, is the example comprehensive enough?
[Example](https://github.com/MicroEJ/docs/blob/8a96d3b324e605aa4b409195129d90396ab3ef74/VEEPortingGuide/eventQueue.rst?plain=1#L113)

Non-extended event
------------------

> Non-extended events are events that can stand on 32 bits.

Author: Done

.. code-block:: java

    +-------+----------+-----------+
    | 0 (1) | Type (7) | Data (24) |
    +-------+----------+-----------+

The first bit equals 0, saying that this is a non-extended event.

> Then there is the event type that stands on 7 bits. 

Author: Done

To finish, there is the data that you want to send through the Event Queue. 

> It stands on 24 bits. 

Author: Done

Offer the event
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> There are two ways to send a non-extended event through the Event Queue: from the native API or the Java API. 

Author: Done

From C API
""""""""""

> To send a non-extended event through the Event Queue using the native API, you must use the ``LLEVENT_offerEvent(int32_t type, int32_t data)`` method from LLEVENT.h.

Author: Done

For example: 

.. code-block:: c

>    int type = 1;

Author: I added the following comment to the example: 

` // Assuming that event_type has been passed from the Java world through a native method after registering your listener.`

   int data = 12;

   LLEVENT_offerEvent(type, data);

From Java API
"""""""""""""

> To send a non-extended event through the Event Queue using the Java API, you must use the ``offerEvent(int type, int data)`` method from the EventQueue API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To send a non-extended event through the Event Queue using the Java API, you must use the ``offerEvent(int type, int data)`` method from the ``EventQueue`` class.
```

Author: Done

For example: 

.. code-block:: java

   EventQueue eventQueue = EventQueue.getInstance();

>    int type = 1;

Author: I added the following comment to the example: 

`   // Assuming that eventType has been stored in the Java world when you registered the listener.`

   int data = 12;

   eventQueue.offerEvent(type, data);

Handle the event
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To handle a non-extended event, you must implement your listener's ``handleEvent(int type, int data)`` method. 
You can process the data received by the Event Queue on this method. 

For example: 

.. code-block:: java

   public class MyListener implements EventListener{
      @Override
      public void handleEvent(int type, int data) {
         System.out.println("My data is equal to: " + data);
      }
   }

Extended event
--------------

> Extended events are events that can not stand on 32 bits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Extended events are events with data that can not be stored on 24 bits.
```

Author: Done

.. code-block:: java

    +-------+----------+-------------+
    | 1 (1) | Type (7) | Length (24) |
    +-------+----------+-------------+
    ...
    +--------------------------------+
    |       Extended Data  (32)      | (x integers)
    +--------------------------------+

On the first 32 bits of the events, you will have: 

- First bit is equal to 1, saying that this is an extended event,

> - The event type that stands on 7 bits,

Author: Done

> - The length of the data in bytes stands on 24 bits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The length of the data in bytes stored on 24 bits.
```

Author: Done

Then you will have the data. 
The number of bytes of the data depends on the length. 

Data Alignment
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> To process the data from an extended event, you will use the EventDataReader API.

Author: Done

You will see it more in detail in the :ref:`Handle the event <handle_extended_event_section>` section.

> With EventDataReader API, there is two way to read an event:

Author: Done

.. _pack_event:

===========
Event Queue
===========

Principle
=========

The Event Queue module provides an asynchronous communication interface between the native world and the Java world based on events.

Functional Description
======================

Overview
--------

The Event Queue Foundation Library allows users to send events from the native world to the Java world. It is composed of a Java API that provides mechanisms to register specific event notifications and a C API that allows someone to send events in the queue.

> .. figure:: images/event-queue-overview.png

Author: Done

> .. figure:: images/event-queue-overview.png

Reviewer 2: For the last bullet, there are still only 1-N numberings in the architecture schema.
I would suggest to use A-Z for event listeners and 1-N for threads & events.

To finish, there is the data that you want to send through the Event Queue. 
It is stored on 24 bits. 

Offer the event
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There are two ways to send a non-extended event through the Event Queue: from the C API or the Java API. 

From C API
""""""""""

To send a non-extended event through the Event Queue using the C API, you must use the ``LLEVENT_offerEvent(int32_t type, int32_t data)`` method from ``LLEVENT.h``.

For example: 

.. code-block:: c

   // Assuming that event_type has been passed from the Java world through a native method after registering your listener.
   int type = event_type;
   int data = 12;

   LLEVENT_offerEvent(type, data);

From Java API
"""""""""""""

To send a non-extended event through the Event Queue using the Java API, you must use the ``offerEvent(int type, int data)`` method from the ``EventQueue`` class.

For example: 

.. code-block:: java

   EventQueue eventQueue = EventQueue.getInstance();

   // Assuming that eventType has been stored in the Java world when you registered the listener.
   int type = eventType;
   int data = 12;

   eventQueue.offerEvent(type, data);

Handle the event
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> To handle a non-extended event, you must implement your listener's ``handleEvent(int type, int data)`` method. 

Reviewer 2: Typo:
```suggestion
To handle a short event, you must implement your listener ``handleEvent(int type, int data)`` method. 
```

You can process the data received by the Event Queue on this method. 

First, you must register your listener as explained :ref:`Event Queue listener <event_queue_listener>` in section.

> For example: 

Reviewer 2: This is unclear: the example does not refer to what precedes (the listener registration).

.. code-block:: java

   public class MyListener implements EventQueueListener{
      @Override
      public void handleEvent(int type, int data) {
         System.out.println("My data is equal to: " + data);
      }
   }

Extended event
--------------

Extended events are events with data that can not be stored on 24 bits.

.. code-block:: java

    +-------+----------+-------------+
    | 1 (1) | Type (7) | Length (24) |
    +-------+----------+-------------+
    ...
    +--------------------------------+
    |       Extended Data  (32)      | (x integers)
    +--------------------------------+

On the first 32 bits of the events, you will have: 

- First bit is equal to 1, saying that this is an extended event,
- The event type stored on 7 bits,

> - The length of the data in bytes stored on 24 bits.

Reviewer 2: What does the length represents ? (number of bytes ? bits ? including the header ?)

Then you will have the data. 
The number of bytes of the data depends on the length. 

Data Alignment
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To process the data from an extended event, you will use an ``EventDataReader`` object.
You will see it more in detail in the :ref:`Handle the event <handle_extended_event_section>` section.

With ``EventDataReader`` API, there are two ways to read an event:

- Read the data with ``read(byte[] b, int off, int len)`` or ``readFully(byte[] b)`` methods. 

   - You will get the data in a byte array and can process it on your own in your ``handleExtendedEvent`` method.

- Read the data with the methods related to the primitive types such as ``readBoolean()`` or ``readByte()``. 

   - It is the easiest way to process your data because you don't have to handle the byte arrays.

>    - This is useful when the extended data you send through the Event Queue is a C structure with multiple fields.

Reviewer 2: I would not say "it is useful" but rather "it is designed for".
To user something else than a C struct may be difficult actually.

   - To use the methods, **your fields must follow this alignment:**

      - A **boolean** (1 byte) will be 1-byte aligned.
      - A **byte** (1 byte) will be 1-byte aligned.
      - A **char** (2 bytes) will be 2-byte aligned.
      - A **double** (8 bytes) will be 8-byte aligned.
      - A **float** (4 bytes) will be 4-byte aligned.
      - An **int** (4 bytes) will be 4-byte aligned.
      - A **long** (8 bytes) will be 8-byte aligned.
      - A **short** (2 bytes) will be 2-byte aligned.
      - An **unsigned byte** (1 byte) will be 1-byte aligned.
      - A **unsigned short** (2 bytes) will be 2-byte aligned.

Offer the event
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> There are two ways to send an extended event through the Event Queue: from the native API or the Java API. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are two ways to send an extended event through the Event Queue: from the C API or the Java API. 
```

For example: 

.. code-block:: java

   EventQueue eventQueue = EventQueue.getInstance();

   // Assuming that eventType has been stored in the Java world when you registered the listener.
   int type = eventType;

   // Array of 3 integers. Each integer is stored in 4 bytes.
   byte[] accelerometerData = new byte[3*4];

   // Write integers into the byte array using ByteArray API.
   ByteArray.writeInt(accelerometerData, 0, 42);
   ByteArray.writeInt(accelerometerData, 4, 72);
   ByteArray.writeInt(accelerometerData, 8, 21);

   eventQueue.offerExtendedEvent(type, accelerometerData);

.. _handle_extended_event_section:

Handle the event
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To handle an extended event, you must implement your listener's ``handleExtendedEvent(int type, EventDataReader eventDataReader)`` method. 
You can process the data received by the Event Queue on this method. 

It provides an EventDataReader that contains the methods needed to read the data of an extended event. 

First, you have to register your listener as explained :ref:`Event Queue listener <event_queue_listener>` in section.

For example: 

.. code-block:: java

>    public class MyListener implements EventQueueListener{
>       @Override
>       public void handleExtendedEvent(int type, EventDataReader eventDataReader) {
>          int x = 0;
>          int y = 0;
>          int z = 0;
> 
>          try {
>             x = eventDataReader.readInt();
>             y = eventDataReader.readInt();
>             z = eventDataReader.readInt();
>          } catch (IOException e) {
>             System.out.println("IOException while reading accelerometer values from the EventDataReader.");
>          }
> 
>          System.out.println("Accelerometer values: X = " + x + ", Y = " + y + ", Z = " + z + ".");
>       }
>    }

Reviewer 2: I would suggest to have a complete example:
```suggestion
EventQueue queue = EventQueue.getInstance();
int type = queue.getNewType();
initialize(type);
queue.registerListener(type, new EventQueueListener() {
	@Override
	public void handleEvent(int type, int data) {
		throw new RuntimeException();
	}
	@Override
	public void handleExtendedEvent(int type, EventDataReader eventDataReader) {
		int x = 0;
		int y = 0;
		int z = 0;

		try {
			x = eventDataReader.readInt();
			y = eventDataReader.readInt();
			z = eventDataReader.readInt();
		} catch (IOException e) {
			System.out.println("IOException while reading accelerometer values from the EventDataReader.");
		}

		System.out.println("Accelerometer values: X = " + x + ", Y = " + y + ", Z = " + z + ".");
	}
});
```

Mock the Event Queue
--------------------

> If you are sending events through the C API in your BSP, you will need to send the same events in one of your :ref:`Mock <mock>`.
> You will have to use the Event Queue Mock API to do so. 
> This API is the equivalent of the C API in the Simulator.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To simulate event that are normally sent through through the C API, use the Event Queue Mock API from your mock.
```

> The Event Queue Mock API must be added to the :ref:`module.ivy <mmm_module_description>` of the MicroEJ 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Event Queue Mock API dependency must be added to the :ref:`module.ivy <mmm_module_description>` of your MicroEJ 
```

Mock project.

.. code-block:: xml

   <dependency org="com.microej.pack.event" name="event-pack" rev="2.0.0" conf="provided->mockAPI"/>

It provides two methods: 

- ``EventQueueMock.offerEvent(int type, int data)`` is the equivalent of ``LLEVENT_offerEvent(int32_t type, int32_t data)`` method from ``LLEVENT.h``.
- ``EventQueueMock.offerExtendedEvent(int type, byte[] data, int dataLength)`` is the equivalent of ``LLEVENT_offerExtendedEvent(int32_t type, void* data, int32_t data_length)`` method from ``LLEVENT.h``.

Example of use:

.. code-block:: java

   // Assuming that event_type has been passed from your Application through a native method after registering your listener.
   int type = event_type;
   int data = 12;

   EventQueueMock.offerEvent(type, data);

Dependencies
============

-  ``LLEVENT_impl.h`` and ``LLEVENT.h`` implementations (see
   :ref:`LLEVENT-API-SECTION`).

.. _pack_event_installation:

Installation
============

The Event Queue :ref:`Pack <pack_overview>` module must be installed in your VEE Port.

> In the Platform configuration project, (``-configuration`` suffix), add

Reviewer 2: At this point of the VPDG, readers should be aware of the terminology used here.
```suggestion
In the VEE Port configuration project, add
```

the following dependency to the :ref:`module.ivy <mmm_module_description>` file:

::

   <dependency org="com.microej.pack.event" name="event-pack" rev="1.0.0" transitive="false"/>

> 
> The Platform project must be rebuilt (:ref:`platform_build`).

Reviewer 2: At this point of the VPDG, readers should be aware of implications of modying the configuration project.
```suggestion
```

Use
===

The `Event Queue API Module`_ must be added to the :ref:`module.ivy <mmm_module_description>` of the MicroEJ 
Application project to use the Event Queue Foundation Library.

.. code-block:: xml

   <dependency org="ej.api" name="event" rev="1.0.0"/>

> .. _Event Queue API Module: https://repository.microej.com/modules/ej/api/

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. _Event Queue API Module: https://repository.microej.com/modules/ej/api/event-queue/
```

- Read the data with ``read(byte[] b, int off, int len)`` or ``readFully(byte[] b)`` methods. 

   - You will get the data in a byte array and can process it on your own in your ``handleExtendedEvent(int type, EventDataReader eventDataReader)`` method.

- Read the data with the methods related to the primitive types such as ``readBoolean()`` or ``readByte()``. 

>    - This is designed for when the extended data you send through the Event Queue is a C structure with multiple fields.

Reviewer 2: Rephrase suggestion:
```suggestion
   - The reader is designed to parse C-struct data.
```

.. code-block:: java

   EventQueue queue = EventQueue.getInstance();
   int type = queue.getNewType();
   initialize(type);
   queue.registerListener(type, new EventQueueListener() {
      @Override
      public void handleEvent(int type, int data) {
         throw new RuntimeException();
      }
      @Override
      public void handleExtendedEvent(int type, EventDataReader eventDataReader) {
         int x = 0;
         int y = 0;
         int z = 0;
         try {
            x = eventDataReader.readInt();
            y = eventDataReader.readInt();
            z = eventDataReader.readInt();
         } catch (IOException e) {
            System.out.println("IOException while reading accelerometer values from the EventDataReader.");
         }
         System.out.println("Accelerometer values: X = " + x + ", Y = " + y + ", Z = " + z + ".");
      }
   });

Mock the Event Queue
--------------------

> To simulate event that are normally sent through through the C API, use the Event Queue Mock API from your mock.

Reviewer 2: Typo:
```suggestion
To simulate event that are normally sent through the C API, use the Event Queue Mock API from your mock.
```
